Abelardo de la Espriella
Abelardo De la Espriella is a Colombian-Italian criminal lawyer and a far-right candidate for the 2026 presidential election.

De la Espriella grew up in Monteria, the Cordoba department in northern Colombia.

The lawyer founded his law firm, De La Espriella Lawyers, in 2002, with offices in Colombia and the United States.

De la Espriella is an admirer of other far-right leaders from the Americas, like Argentina’s Javier Milei, El Salvador’s Nayib Bukele, and the United States’ Donald Trump.

The lawyer’s policy proposals favor shrinking the government, lowering taxes, sacking work and business regulations, and firm military action. The typical neo-liberal talking points.

De la Espriella focused his campaign on a mainly aggressive and disruptive social media presence.

The Wikipedia page on the lawyer was removed in late August of 2025.

The candidate created a Wikipedia-like page on his campaign website, which omitted multiple scandals that involved De la Espriella and his law firm.

A key part of his campaign is the typical conservative rhetoric, focused on words such as “family values,” “God,” “honor,” and the rejection of feminism and the “left.”

The once openly atheist lawyer reinvented himself as a devout Christian weeks before he launched his campaign.

As of now, De la Espriella runs a social media-based campaign with the support of powerful clans in Colombia, and has expressed interest in taking part in a multipartite primary with conservative and far-right candidates.

Alleged ties to AUC
De la Espriella was an advisor to the AUC paramilitary group during peace negotiations with the government of former president Alvaro Uribe between 2002 and 2005.

According to Noticias Uno, a foundation created by De la Espriella, FIPAZ, received more than 1.3 billion pesos from the AUC.

Several paramilitary leaders stated that the organization “aligned with the paramilitary cause.”

The Prosecutor General’s Office dropped investigations into De la Espriella’s alleged ties to the AUC in 2009 and allegations that he tried to rip off the paramilitaries in 2017.

Uribe slapp suits
The presidential candidate is a close associate of former president Alvaro Uribe, one of the main promoters of paramilitary groups in the 1990s.

On Uribe’s behalf, De la Espriella tried and failed to take down a popular online series, “Matarife,” which exposed Uribe’s ties to the Medellin Cartel and alleged ties to the AUC.

This lawsuit was part of a campaign that sought to intimidate journalists reporting on Uribe’s controversial past.

According to press freedom foundation FLIP, De la Espriella “abuses legal tools to intimidate and silence voices who reveal or question any issue that concerns him,” in often futile attempts to protect his clients’ self-proclaimed “good name and honor.”

Other clients
De la Espriella defended controversial businessman Alex Saab, who spent a while in US jails for allegedly laundering money for Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro.

According to Univision, a police officer was convicted of bribery after admitting he received an iPhone from De La Espriella Lawyers in exchange for leaking information on investigations into Saab’s alleged criminal activity.

Another case that the presidential candidate left out on his bootleg Wikipedia was his defense of DMG Holding S.A. founder David Murcia Guzman.

Guzman was the brains behind the biggest Ponzi scheme in Colombia’s history and was sentenced to 30 years and 8 months in prison for money laundering and illegally receiving money.

De la Espriella spent most of his career defending celebrities.

Who Is Abelardo De La Espriella, the Far-Right Lawyer Who Wants to Be President of Colombia?

PIEDECUESTA, Colombia – One of the main candidates in Colombia's first-round presidential election on Sunday is a combative criminal lawyer who flaunts his wealth and machismo, stars in his own music videos, and is promising a crackdown on crime.

Abelardo De La Espriella has steadily risen in the polls by portraying himself as a populist outsider, one who belongs to no political party and has never held elective office. All this, he insists, is a good thing.

"I'm not a politician," he told the crowd at a recent campaign rally in the northern Colombian town of Piedecuesta. "Politicians never keep their promises. But we entrepreneurs are true to our word."
 
De La Espriella is promising a sharp turn to the right after four years of left-wing rule under President Gustavo Petro, who is banned by the constitution from reelection. Amid a surge in guerrilla violence, kidnappings and extortion, De La Espriella says he will end ongoing peace talks with Colombian rebel groups, launch a military offensive, and build 10 "mega-prisons."  

Businesswoman Belkis Serrano, who was at the rally, compares De La Espriella to Nayib Bukele, who is president of El Salvador and a close ally of the Trump administration. Bukele's authoritarian government has put more than 2% of El Salvador's adult population behind bars. With his close-cropped hair and goatee, De La Espriella bears a close resemblance to Bukele.

"We need a Bukele so that things change here in Colombia," Serrano says.  

A De La Espriella victory would reinforce a recent shift to the right in Latin America where right- and center-right governments now control Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Honduras, and Paraguay. Right-wing candidates Keiko Fujimori in Peru and Flavio Bolsonaro in Brazil could add to this tally by winning presidential elections later this year.
 
De La Espriella, 47, first made his name, and his fortune, by providing legal counsel to controversial clients. One, for example, was the founder of a pyramid scheme that bilked thousands of Colombians out of their savings. Another was Alex Saab, a Colombian businessman who had close ties to ousted Venezuelan dictator Nicolás Maduro and was extradited to the U.S. last month for money-laundering.

He's been called "the devil's advocate" but it's paid off. He owns a Rolls Royce and flies in a private jet. A clotheshorse, he developed his own fashion brand – De La Espriella Style – a collection that includes luxury watches and sneakers selling for $1,300 a pair. He also stars in his own glitzy music videos in which he croons "My Way,", "Volare" and other songs in Spanish.

Though ostentatious, Bogotá political analyst Sandra Borda says that for many average Colombians De La Espriella embodies the dream of upward mobility.
 
"He has gathered a big fortune. He has his own airplane. The way he dresses. The way he's a showoff. People like that sort of thing," she says. "There's also the tropical ingredient. He sings. He dances. He has a colorful personality and that creates a lot of impact through social media."

Yet some are repelled by his off-color behavior.

Notoriously thin-skinned, De La Espriella delights in insulting journalists. When asked in a recent radio interview how he would attract female voters, he jokingly pointed to a photo of himself with an obvious bulge in the front of his pants.
 
"When he's caught in unscripted moments, that show his machismo, his disdain for opposition, his disdain for journalists, those character flaws will draw people away from his candidacy," says Sergio Guzmán, director of the Colombia Risk Analysis consulting firm.

A man passes in front of an election poster of Colombia's presidential candidate for the Pacto Historico leftist coalition, Ivan Cepeda, in Bogota on May 28, 2026.
A man passes in front of an election poster of Colombia's presidential candidate for the Pacto Historico leftist coalition, Ivan Cepeda, in Bogota on May 28, 2026.

Sergio Angel/AFP
Most polls show De La Espriella in second place behind leading candidate Iván Cepeda. He's a leftwing senator and protégé of President Petro who is, in many ways, the polar opposite of De La Espriella.

Austere and plainspoken, Cepeda, 63, lives in a modest apartment in Bogotá, eschews suits and neckties for sweaters, and looks like the university philosophy professor he once was. He pledges to continue with many of the Petro administration policies that have brought more indigenous and Afro-Colombians into government and have increased wages and benefits for the working class.

Ever since his father, a Communist Party politician, was gunned down by paramilitaries in 1994, Cepeda has been a fierce advocate for human rights and peace talks. In 2016, Cepeda helped convince Colombia's largest guerrilla group to sign a peace treaty. He's also been a key player in the Petro government's so-called Total Peace program. It aims to disarm a new generation of criminal groups involved in drug trafficking, extortion and illegal mining.

"I call on all the armed groups to follow the path of peace," Cepeda said at a recent campaign rally in the working-class town of Funza located just west of Bogotá.

But many analysts say the Total Peace policy has backfired. Mistakes by inexperienced government negotiators, like declaring ceasefires, allowed the criminal groups to expand their control over the countryside.

Partly as a result, the criminal groups have grown from 15,000 to about 27,000 armed fighters under the Petro administration, according to Javier Florez off the Bogotá-based Ideas for Peace Foundation. In the runup to the election, they have carried out massacres, bombings, and kidnappings, mostly in remote rural areas, that have soured many Colombians on negotiations. Yet should he win the presidency, Cepeda is promising more peace talks while offering no coherent military strategy to confront criminal groups, Florez says.

All this has provided an opening for Cepeda's presidential rivals. Although Cepeda has led the polls all year, he is unlikely to get more than half the votes in the first-round election because there are 13 candidates on the ballot.

That would set-up a June 21 runoff between Cepeda and whoever finishes second on Sunday. Most polls predict that will be De La Espriella. But another candidate, right-wing Senator Paloma Valencia, could catch up to him. 
 
Valencia wants to become Colombia's first-ever female president and paints herself as a more mainstream conservative. In a speech this month, she called De La Espriella a "coward" for campaigning in a bullet-proof vest and mocked his macho pronouncements. 

De La Espriella didn't seem to notice. As he ended his campaign rally in Piedecuesta, he touted his toughness by referring to the family jewels.